software: Edit software install doc, add AppImage section (#74)
openSUSE/openSUSE-docs-revamped-temp: project/docs/alternative_procurement.md

## Introduction

When it comes to getting software, modern Linux operating systems have access to a wide array of methods and formats.
The openSUSE distributions are no exception:

*   The official and unofficial repositories, which you interact with from `zypper`, and which provide binaries packaged as RPM files.

*   Third-party installers, which you interact with from a command prompt by downloading files (for example, with `wget`, `curl`, or `git`).
    These may provide you with a something ready to install, complete with binaries and installation scripts.

>     Alternatively, they may only include source code and build scripts, so you must compile them yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Or they may only include source code and build scripts, in which case you must compile them yourself.
```

Reviewer: Just more streamlined.

Author: 1. I agree the sentence could use some work.
2. I am not sure I agree about the suggestion.

Counter-suggestion:
```suggestion
    Alternatively, they may only include source code and build scripts which you have to compile yourself.
```

*   _Flatpak_ is a delivery tool for containerized desktop application.
    It provides apps packaged up with all their dependencies.
    You typically interact with it using the `flatpak` command-line utility.

*   _Snapcraft_ is Ubuntu's equivalent to Flatpak.
    It similarly provides apps in single files, containerized with their dependencies.
    You typically interact with it using the `snapd` command-line utility.

*   _AppImages_ are a vendor-neutral, cross-distro app format.
    Apps are delivered as a single files, which you manually download from websites and various hosts.
    AppImages do not need any supporting tools, they only need to be marked executable.

The goal of this document is to help you understand these formats and methods, as well as their strengths and weaknesses.
We will also make a few openSUSE-specific recommendations along the way.

## Official and third-party RPM repositories

RPM packages (`.rpm`) are the traditional and most common way of obtaining new software on openSUSE distributions.
Installing RPM packages works like this:

1.  Find the repository providing the package you are looking for.

>     *   If the package is provided by one of the official repositories that openSUSE already knows about, such as [download.opensuse.org/update/tumbleweed/](https://download.opensuse.org/update/tumbleweed/), it will show up in `zypper search <package_name>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   If the package is provided by one of the official repositories, such as [download.opensuse.org/update/tumbleweed/](https://download.opensuse.org/update/tumbleweed/), it will show up in `zypper search <package_name>`.
```

Author: Good catch, "knows about" is not great. But I'd try this rewording to make it more usefl

```suggestion
    *   If the package is provided by one of the official repositories, which are preconfigured in openSUSE, such as [download.opensuse.org/update/tumbleweed/](https://download.opensuse.org/update/tumbleweed/), it will show up in `zypper search <package_name>`.
```

Reviewer: Ok.

    *   If the package is _not_ provided by an official repository, you will first need to add the repository.

    !!! tip
        Use `zypper lr -d` to list all your repositories and their addresses.

2.   Install the target package with `sudo zypper in <package_name>`.

### The _openSUSE Software_ website

> The openSUSE project maintains a website where contributors can find software packages for easy installation, especially those built using the _openSUSE Build Service_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The openSUSE project offers a website where contributors can find software packages for easy installation, especially those built using the _openSUSE Build Service_.
```

The site can be found at [software.opensuse.org](https://software.opensuse.org/).

It offers a search engine and references to official and unofficial software repositories.
In addition, in some cases, the tool also offers downloadable packages for Debian, Ubuntu, Fedora, or other Linux distributions.

It also offers easy installation using the _YaST_ administration tool of openSUSE.

> If a package is available for your version of openSUSE, generally, click the link with the version number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a package is available for your version of openSUSE, click the link with the version number.
```

This will download a `.ymp` file which your web browser should offer to open using the YaST software management tool.

> If not, you can click on the `.ymp` file in your file manager and YaST should open it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the package does not reference your version of openSUSE, you can click on the `.ymp` file in your file manager and YaST should open it.
```

Author: Mmh, no, this is not what it's supposed to mean -- we're talking about browser not configured to open YMP files automatically after download.

Reviewer: Oh I see, my bad.

    This lets you verify that the package has not been tampered with:

    ```
    $   rpm --import <the-package-public-key>.asc
    $   rpm --checksig <the-rpm-package-file>.rpm
    ```

2.  To install the package, point `zypper` to the RPM file:

    ```
    sudo zypper in ~/Downloads/<package>.rpm
    ```

We recommend that you enable the _refresh_ setting for the repositories of the applications you use most.
If you don't do this, in some configurations, `sudo zypper dup` will not automatically acquire updates for the package provided by that repository.

1.  Find out the number of of the repo and whether the _refresh_ setting is enabled:

    ```
    $   sudo zypper modifyrepo --refresh <repo_number>
    ```

    The first column of the table, `#`, indicates the repo number.
    The last column of the table, `Refresh`, indicates whether the _refresh_ setting is enabled (`Yes`) or not (`No`).

2.  For repos that are not yet set to refresh automatically, enable the _refresh_ setting:

    ```
    $   sudo zypper modifyrepo --refresh <repo_number>
    ```

### Pros, cons, when to use

> __Pros:__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Pros of official RPMs:__
```

Reviewer: Or _RPMs provided by official repositories_, just less wordy.

Author: Hm, this is inconsistent with the "Pros"/"Cons" headlines elsewhere in the file...

*   The most "natural" way to install programs in the openSUSE ecosystem.

> *   Has the best performance (startup time and execution speed) of all solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Have the best performance (startup time and execution speed) of all solutions.
```

> *   Uses the lowest amount of RAM and hard drive capacity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Use the lowest amount of RAM and hard drive capacity.
```

__Cons:__

> *   Heavily depends upon the libraries and other dependencies provided by your operating system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   RPMs heavily depend upon the libraries and other dependencies provided by your operating system.
```

    You may not be able to install the latest versions of some programs, because the supporting libraries provided by your distro are too old.
    Conversely, it can also mean that drastic changes in your system-wide dependencies might prevent the program from running at all.

> *   Depends on the availability of the distribution packagers and maintainers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   RPMs depend on the availability of the distribution packagers and maintainers
```

    Other solutions are more developer-driven or benefit from cross-distribution maintainership (_Flatpaks_, _Snaps_ and _AppImages_).

*   You depend on the maintainers and software-packagers of your distribution.
    Other solutions are more developer-driven or benefit from cross-distribution maintenance (_Flatpaks_, _Snaps_ and _AppImages_).

__Best used when:__

*   The software you are installing is a core utility or library (e.g. `curl`, `gcc`, `python-devel`).

*   You know that you won't need several versions of the software installed at the same time.

*   You need stability and minimal resource usage.

*   You can afford a marginally slower update pace than with other solutions.

## Third-party remote providers

> We use "third-party remote providers" to mean for websites, services or remote machines offering automatic installation using scripts provided along with the desired application.

Author: ```suggestion
We use "third-party remote providers" to mean websites, services or remote machines offering automatic installation using scripts provided along with the desired application.
```

Since the details of the installation depend on custom-made installation scripts, your experience with this method can vary significantly from one provider to another.
Thoroughly follow the instructions mentioned by the provider.
For example, installing the Rust developer stack is a simple as copying and pasting this command into a terminal window:

```
$   curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
```

Then follow the interactive instructions.

!!! warning
    Installation scripts might require `sudo` rights.
    Be mindful about what you are installing, and from whom and where you obtained it.

### Pros, cons, when

__Pros:__

> *   Has the best performance (startup time and execution speed) of all solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Binaries from third-parties offer the best performance (startup time and execution speed) of all solutions (except for official RPMs, on par with them).
```

*   Uses the lowest amount of RAM and hard drive capacity.

__Cons:__

*   No control over the behaviour of the script, especially if the script asks to be run as `sudo`.
    This can incur some risk.

*   Heavily depends upon libraries and other dependencies provided by your operating system.
    This means that drastic changes in your system-wide dependencies might prevent the program from running at all.

__Best used when:__

*   You are 100% sure you can trust the provider.

*   The software you are installing is a command-line tool that is not integral to the system.

*   You know that you won't need several versions of the software installed at the same time.

> *   You need maximal performance/minimal usage.

Author: ```suggestion
*   You need maximal performance and minimal resource usage.
```

## Flatpaks

> _Flatpak_ is a complete solution for installing, updating and running desktop applications from a containerized environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Flatpak_ is a complete solution for installing, updating and running desktop applications from a containerized environment. Flatpaks represent the culmination of combined efforts to offer performant and quality desktop applications compatible with all distributions.
```

Reviewer: Some pat on the back of flatpaks might not be out of place.

Author: Tbh, that sounds like marketing (not docs) and leaves a lot of open questions, like: "Combined efforts" of whom? If Flatpaks are the culmination of performance, why do we say they are less performant than RPMs? ...

Reviewer: Adjusted.

     For users, there is also no way to ensure that different Flatpak applications use the same runtime, as dependencies on runtimes are specified by developers.
    This means that some duplication is to be expected, wasting some disk space.

#### Improving desktop integration (KDE Plasma)

The degree of independence that Flatpaks enjoy with respect to the host operating system means that some frictions may occur now and then.
This is particularly true for applications (and runtimes) which do not play nice with recent rendering and compositing frameworks.
For example, dragging and dropping a file for sending via a messaging application running as a Flatpak might not work as seamlessly as expected.
For these corner cases, you can tinker with the runtime's parameters.

Consider for example `org.telegram.desktop`.
Should your version of this app seem to be affected by the above bug, you can try to run the application as:
```
$   flatpak run --env=QT_QPA_PLATFORM=xcb org.telegram.desktop
```

This instructs the runtime to use X11 instead of Wayland as the compositing client.

> There are many other environment parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many other environment parameters.
```

To learn which to apply to a particular application, read the documentation and GitHub Issues for the Flatpak wrapper of the application.

!!! info

>     All Flatpak applications hosted on Flathub have a public repository (often on GitHub) where you read GitHub Issues and participate in the conversation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    All Flatpak applications hosted on Flathub have a public repository (often on GitHub) where you can read GitHub Issues and participate in the conversation.
```

*   Excellent safety for your operating system (because most dependencies are not shared with the host operating system and because Flatpaks installed with `--user` survive system reinstallations/restorations)

*   Easy to update (`flatpak update`)

__Cons:__

*   Eats up significantly more hard drive space than the alternative methods and formats (because not all dependencies can be shared between Flatpaks)

*   Sometimes rough around the edges in terms of integration with the desktop environment

__Best used when:__

*   You are using many applications with a graphical interface and you don't want to expose them or your system to conflicts of dependencies (useful for Tumbleweed and MicroOS, whose core packages change frequently).

*   You want to have freshly updated and widely tested applications (the same as most other Linux distributions).

*   You plan on using many user applications (the more Flatpaks you have, the more dependencies they can share).

## Snaps

!!! info
    Please help finish this section.

<!-- ### Pros, cons, when -->

## AppImage

AppImage is the simplest cross-platform application package format.

> However, you need to do a little more work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you need to do a little manual work.
```

```
chmod +x <application_name>.AppImage
```

To run the app, double-click it in your file manager, or run it from your terminal:
```
./<application_name>.AppImage
```

To improve organization of your AppImages, create a dedicated directory for them in your home directory and move each file.
The authors of AppImage recommend `~/Applications` for this purpose.

With AppImages, it is your responsibility to keep the app up-to-date.
While some apps notify you when a new version becomes available, you will usually have to perform the following manually:

*   Download the new version, move it into your desired folder and mark it executable
*   If you have created any shortcuts or launchers, you will have to edit their settings to point to the new version.
*   When everything works, delete the `.AppImage` file of the old version.

### Pros, cons, when

__Pros__:

*   AppImages need no supporting libraries, tooling, or commands.

*   You can install, update, and remove them even without admin privileges on the computer.

*   You can easily run multiple versions side-by-side, as version numbers are typically embedded in the filename.

__Cons__:

*   Maintenance is your responsibility:

>     You have to update your apps yourself, by hand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You have to update your apps yourself, manually.
```

*   The AppImage format does not offer any kind of isolation or separation between apps.

__Best used when:__

*   The app is not available in RPM form, or the RPM assumes a different OS (such as Fedora) and will not install correctly.

*   There is no Flatpak or Snap, or you don't have or don't want, the extra plumbing of Flatpak or Snap.

*   You don't have privileges to install new software system-wide.

## Summary and conclusion

Even though Leap and Tumbleweed's official repositories are numerous, you will find yourself in search of alternatives at times.
Here are some simple rules of thumbs that emerge from the pros and cons discussed above.

Installing Snaps, Flatpaks, or AppImages is a serious alternative to installing from official repositories if you are looking for a program which:

*   Has a graphical interface

*   Updates often

*   Relies on dependencies that are not provided in official repositories

*   Relies on dependencies that are more recent than those in official repositories

This applies to both Leap and Tumbleweed's official repositories.

When wondering which to use, between Snaps, Flatpaks and AppImages:

> *   Favour __Flatpaks__ if you:

Author: @why-not-try-calmer For the record, are you using British English or American in these docs? (I left the British version here -- official SUSE docs use American English though.)

Reviewer: Let's stick to American.

> *   Favour __Flatpaks__ if you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Favor __Flatpaks__ if you:
```
